---
title: Clod√©ric Mars - Resume
last_update: 2020-05-04
header: AI Product Engineer / Tech Leader / Public Speaker
---

import ResumeLayout from '../../components/resumeLayout';

export default ResumeLayout;

## About me

I am a creative, enthusiastic and thoughtful software engineer. Since 2006, I've
been building and deploying **AIs designed for Humans**, bridging _deeptech_ and
usage.

### üë∑‚Äç‚ôÇÔ∏èAI product engineer

To **close the gap between lab bench and operationalization**, I've developed a
wide range of skills: AI & ML algorithms, applied Data Science, distributed
cloud architecture, API design, product management, workshop facilitation,
project management.

### üë®‚ÄçüíªTech Leader

Throughout the years my role has evolved from individual contributor, to tech
leader, managing multiple teams and coordinating their work with outside
stakeholders. As a CTO at craft ai, I've **recruited and managed a team of ~15**
AI researchers, software engineers and data scientists.

### üë®‚Äçüè´Public speaker

Pitching projects, facilitating workshops, evangelizing leads, giving technical
talks or inspiring ones, **I built up an extensive _public speaking_
experience**. I had the opportunity to talk at several conferences, both in
France and abroad and countless meetups. I also had the opportunity to organize
and moderate conference tracks and round tables.

### ü§üAnd now...

My last adventure as CTO of craft ai, the company I co-created, came to an end
recently, I am now looking for my next challenge! In this transition period, I'm
helping companies, small or large, to imagine and deploy AI products that
provide value to their businesses. Do not hesitate to contact me!

## Experiences

### Co-founder & CTO @ [craft ai](https://www.craft.ai/) / 2015-03 - 2020-04

Building upon some prototypes we built at MASA Group, we raised 2 M‚Ç¨ and created
craft ai, an Enterprise AI API to build self learning AIs able to collaborate
with Humans. We reached a growth stage, **powering a dozen AIs** for our
entreprise customers such as Total, EDF and Dassault Aviation.

As CTO, I was particularly **in charge of the product & tech activities**,
recruiting and leading a team of ~15 Machine Learning researchers, software
engineers and data scientists while staying hands-on in R&D, biz dev and
evangelism. I also participated in every aspects of the company inception and
development: fund raising, business model, positioning, business plan...

### Lead Software Engineer & Product Manager @ [MASA Group](https://masasim.com/) / 2012-01 - 2015-02

I was recruited to lead a product development team at MASA Group, a leading AI
company, founded by AI researchers in 1996. I managed a team of ~5 developers
distributed between Paris and Munich and later also took the Product Management
role after ~2 years. We developed from scratch an AI middleware enabling non
experts to create and control AIs in simulations and video games.

I participated in the business development and global strategy for this product
in collaboration with the company C-Level and coordinated the effort with the
sales and other R&D teams.

### R&D Software Engineer @ [Golaem](http://golaem.com/) / 2009-03 - 2011-12

I came back to the lab where I interned during my master's at
[INRIA](https://www.inria.fr/) to join the initial R&D team of Golaem, the _spin
off_ they co-founded. I took part in the **industrialization of the initial
crowd simulation academic prototype** where I was in charge of the navigation
(path finding & steering) module.

While we built this rock solid foundations we prototyped its usage in various
industries, I had the opportunity to coordinate an integration project with
Dassault Syst√®mes and also work on a train passenger simulation project with
SNCF.

This core technology was used to build Golaem's main product, the leading crowd
simulation tool for the film industry being used for special effects in live
action and animation.

### Software Engineer @ [Open](https://www.open.global/fr) / 2006-07 - 2009-02

#### Java/JEE architect / 2008-09 - 2009-02

I joined a small project team that developed the first user generated content
feature for pagesjaunes.fr. I worked on the first version of the backend and was
in charge of the collaboration with eXo Platform who provided the moderation
backoffice.

#### GIS/3D authoring toolchain developer / 2006-07 - 2008-07

I was hired by Teamlog (now part of Open) to be an initial member of a team that
grew from 4 to ~20, we developed an authoring toolchain to create virtual cities
from GIS data and geolocalized photos as a part of a larger project orchestrated
by Orange Labs. Our toolchain was used to build virtual versions of Paris and
Barcelona.

## Education

### INSA de Rennes, MEng (Dipl√¥me d'ing√©nieur) in Computer Science / 2001-09 - 2006-06

2 years of general scientific and engineering courses and then 3 years of
computer science specialization.

### Universit√© de Rennes 1, MSc in AI / 2005-09 - 2006-06

Academia-oriented 1 year curriculum with a focus on Artificial Intelligence,
including machine learning and symbolic reasoning, in collaboration with INRIA.
