---
title: First day at SIGGRAPH
date: 2009-08-04
redirect_from:
  - /wordpress-2
  - /first-day-at-SIGGRAPH
archive: true
---

I'm happy to be at SIGGRAPH this year, throughout the week I'll try to post
little reports of what I've done there. After a very long trip (3 flight and a
delay of 2h30 at Atlanta), Stéphane and I arrived at our hotel in New Orleans
just in time to dinner and go to bed.

## Day 1 - First conference day.

The conference start badly for me, my registration form had been lost but the
payment had been made... 2 hours later and a few call (thanks Stéphane) to
France and I was in, excited like a kid at he zoo ! The first session I attended
was featuring the ACM SIGGRAPH award and the keynote of Randy Thom a famous
sound designer. The awards was given to great researcher and artists, no one I
knew except Rob Cook, the guy who created Pixar's Renderman, he got The Steven
Anson Coons Award. The keynote by Randy Thom was quite a disappointment, this
guy, who has participated in tons of movies, chose to talk about "Designing a
Movie for Sound" by presenting the work of others: Apocalypse now and Wall-E.
The keynote was essentially excerpts from those 2 movies, interviews of people
who had worked on (From the DVD bonuses concrning Wall-E) and common sense.

![ACM crap](./acm-crap.jpeg)

On the afternoon, I started by the screening of the nominees at the animation
festival, with lots of great stuff, by the way the french touch won again :)
Next was 4 interesting talks about animation and physics in games and movies.
These did not features technical breakthrough but industrial "real world"
implementations of advanced techniques. I was particularly interested by the
Pixar guy talking about the physic simulation of the balloon canopy in "Up".
Last, but not least the technical papers fast forward. The rules are simple:
each team presenting a technical paper at SIGGRAPH this year has to present his
work in 50 seconds, some sort of teaser for the talk. Some were really funny,
some were really impressive, some were really shy and most of the asiatics team
choose to present a video with a recorded comment instead of talking... The 2
hours felt like two minutes ! I want more ! That's all for today, tomorrow the
exhibition begins !
